

**Average Salary Estimation Project**  
By: Wina Aaron and Emanda Bisrat

**Overview and Motivation**  
The aim of the project is to develop a predictive model to estimate the average salary of a data science job based on multiple factors like job qualifications, locations, type of ownership/how many years since it was founded, etc. The motivation for this project stems from investigating a job industry that is not only incredibly popular in recent years, but something that we as data science majors will soon delve into. By building this model, we hope to provide transparency in the data science field in 2017, by exploring multiple predictors to see which were the most significant, and also compare it to what’s the most significant now. The insights that we hope to gain are trends in salary distributions in the data science job market.

**Related Work**  
This dataset has had several analyses and reports, including analyzing salary trends in different geographic regions, identifying high-paying job titles, investigating the job demand in terms of qualifications of potential employees, and overall determining which features have the most significant impact on salary prediction. This dataset has been used mostly for learning and research purposes. Ahmad, Maurya, and N \[2024\] conducted a study and used this dataset to explore the top 10 industries by job listings, top 10 regions that have the highest average salaries, distribution of company ratings, the average salary by the size of companies, comparing percentages of high salary jobs and low salary jobs, and more. 

**Footnotes**  
Ahmad, Y., Maurya, N., N, N. (2024). *City Employee Salary Data Prediction* Vellore Institute of Technology School of Computer Science and Engineering 

**Describe the data**  
This data originated on the website Glassdoor. Glassdoor is an online platform that provides information about job listings, estimated salaries, employers, companies, reviews etc. Glassdoor generates its data, such as the salary estimates, by using salary data from millions of employees and third-party sources using machine learning algorithms. Glassdoor mainly relies on user-generated content, from ratings, reviews, etc. about specific companies. In addition Glassdoor partners with employers to collect additional data. For our specific data, it was collected in 2017 through these various sources and contains the job listings within the Data Science field. We came to possess this information on Kaggle. It was scraped from Glassdoor.com by Ramiro Gomez and presented to us in a dataset with multiple columns pertaining to each job. The dataset contains a total of 33 columns of predictors and 741 rows of different listings.

**Exploratory Analysis**  
The histograms of the predictors we chose to keep for our model show us interesting distributions and tell us more about the data. Some of the observations we collected was that most companies are no more than 25 years old, the typical average salary at this time was ranging from $75-100k, most ownerships had a median rating of about 3.5, most of the employees who got the job lived in the same state as the job location, etc. In addition, it appears that most employees had Python and Excel skills as opposed to R, AWS, and Spark. We also composed a correlation matrix to view the correlation between variables in an effort to avoid multicollinearity, and found no predictors were highly correlated. It seems like Python and Excel were the most desirable skills for these jobs in 2017 which is interesting in comparison to today. According to DataCamp, python is still very relevant and desirable today but R and SQL are on the rise and becoming more desirable this past year. We also wanted to see which job titles were the most common on this Glassdoor page in 2017\. The job title ‘Data Scientist’ was the most common and appeared 131 times, while ‘Data Engineer’ and ‘Senior Data Scientist’ were the second and the third most common job titles. It seems that the job market at the time was focused on these jobs in particular. 

We created two visualizations to compare two variables with our outcome variable. The first one compares the predictor type of ownership and our outcome average salary. The scatter plot in Figure 2 shows that firstly, private companies and public companies are heavily concentrated, indicating that these are the most types of ownership. Also, our scatter plot indicates that private companies tend to offer higher salaries in comparison with the rest, and public companies come in at a close second. Subsidiary or Business Segment, although not that common in this dataset, also offers a couple high salaries. 

Our second visualization compares the predictor Length Description and Avg Salary, in an effort to see if a longer job description would entail a higher salary due to more qualifications, responsibilities, etc. The scatter plot in Figure 3 shows that there is a weak positive correlation, as both variables tend to go up in response to one another but the relation is not very strong. The correlation coefficient for this relationship is positive but also very small (0.079) indicating that there is a positive correlation but it is very weak. 

**Models:**  
We decided to use a Decision Tree Classifier and Feature Importance to find the most significant predictors in our dataset. Our top 5 predictors were the length of the job description, the rating of the ownership, the age of the ownership, the state of California, and the knowledge of the coding language python. We also used k-means clustering and chose 2 features with high importance. The x-axis for these visualizations is the average salary and the y-axis varies, each being its own respective predictor. We found it interesting that in Figure 4, companies that are younger tend to have higher salaries compared to older companies. In Figure 5, we found that the rating of the job doesn’t have a strong correlation with a higher salary. We did notice that for Cluster 2, there aren’t many jobs with lower ratings (ranging from 3-3.5) that have high salaries. 

The accuracy score for the Decision Tree Classifier is 0.81, indicating that our classifier is performing reasonably well. We also used logistic regression as one of our models. For our outcome variable we split it into two binary variables, a high average salary and a low average salary. Our accuracy score for our logistic regression model was 0.69. 

We then implemented two visualizations for both our decision tree classifier and our logistic regression model to compare the actual and the predicted values. This helped us visualize the performance. As shown in Figures 6 and 7, we found that our predicted values aligned well with the actual values, more specifically with our decision tree visualization. Our logistic regression visualization was also decent but not as well as the decision tree. .   
**Final Analysis and Reflection:**  
By reflecting on this project, we found which predictors were the most significant for job listings in the Data Science field in 2017 and which weren’t so prioritized. We answered our initial questions, which were: What’s skills are in high demand in this field at the time? Do said skills contribute to an increase in average salary and what predictors affect salary the most? We were able to analyze different relationships between predictors and visualize the performance of our predictive model as well. Another main goal of ours is to see the differences between 2017 and 2024, seeing as technological advances are rapidly growing, especially considering the rise of AI. As we will be entering the data science working field soon, we wanted to explore any trends and patterns. The dataset provided a comprehensive view of the Data Science landscape in 2017, shedding light on emerging trends and sought-after skills. While our analysis revealed consistent patterns in the skills in demand, we also uncovered notable disparities in the preferences of companies. These findings underscore the dynamic nature of the field, where commonalities and diversities in hiring criteria reflect the evolving needs and priorities of organizations within the industry.

**Work Cited**

Luna, Javier Canales. “The Top 15 Data Scientist Skills for 2024.” DataCamp, November 30, 2023\. [https://www.datacamp.com/blog/top-15-data-scientist-skills](https://www.datacamp.com/blog/top-15-data-scientist-skills)

Methodology: Glassdoor job market report. (n.d.). [https://www.glassdoor.com/research/app/uploads/sites/2/2019/04/Methodology-Glassdoor-Job-Market-Report-2-2.pdf](https://www.glassdoor.com/research/app/uploads/sites/2/2019/04/Methodology-Glassdoor-Job-Market-Report-2-2.pdf)

